[language-agnostic-wg] first attempt at a language neutral explanation of the Tracer API (#354)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/api-tracing.md

## Tracer

A `Tracer` is the code responsible for starting `Spans`s and it exposes the API
which [library developers][] use when instrumenting their code. The API MUST

> allow the [application developers][] to configure or specify the implementation

Reviewer: Looking at another PR I noticed a similar idea in an introduction: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/430/files#diff-9c6d57b34defe784fc21653cedacae6dR56-R58

I'm guessing this was the intent here, right?

at runtime. The implementation is referred to as the SDK in this spec, which is
used by all instrumented code within the program.

> A `Tracer` is more than just the code though. Each `Tracer` has a name and 

Author: The otep says it is optional:

>  The version (following the convention proposed in https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/38) is basically optional but should be supplied

> A `Tracer` is more than just the code though. Each `Tracer` has a name and 

Reviewer: Gotcha, thanks for the ref 😄

> resource attached to it. The API must provide [library developers][] a way to

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure we're calling this option a "resource" now. There's an active discussion in https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/84

Author: So Provider has a Resource and named tracers have a component?

Not sure this PR should be updated to match an otep which still needs to be accepted.

Reviewer 3: The 1:1 mapping that was tracer:resource is now TracerProvider:resource.

Each application (resource) should have a single tracer provider. Each instrumentation library (including auto-instrumentation, and built-in instrumentation libraries) within that application acquires its own tracer from the provider.

Example:

Application "My Web" uses http library named `foo-http` and mysql library named `bar-mysql`. The `foo-http` library has built-in opentelemetry integration, but `bar-mysql` does not, so the application also uses `bar-mysql-auto` to instrument `bar-mysql`.

In this case, there would be 1 tracer provider for "My Web" application. The library `foo-http` would acquire a tracer with its own name/version to instrument itself. The library `bar-mysql-auto` would acquire a tracer with its own name/version to instrument the `bar-mysql` library.

Reviewer 3: @tsloughter everything in my comment above is merged in OTEP. The open OTEP PR is specifically about adding a `component` to the tracers returned by the tracer provider and is separate from my answer here.

Author: So the change is to simply remove `resource` from what a named tracer has and instead move that to part of the provider? And leave out any mention of a component for a named tracer, just saying the tracers have names/versions and nothing else (for now)?

Reviewer 3: Yes for now until the component OTEP merges (if it merges)

Author: Went to write this and then remembered resource is in the sdk and not api. Should it still be mentioned in the API about the provider or moved to the provider description in the sdk spec?

Author: Updated to remove mention of Resource.

## Tracer

A `Tracer` is the code responsible for how `Spans`s are started and

> it exposes the API which [library developers](glossary.md#library-developer) use when

Author: Nice, thanks!

instrumenting their code. The API MUST allow the [end user](glossary.md#end-user) to
configure or specify at runtime the implementation, the default full
implementation is referred to as the SDK in this spec, which is used by all
instrumented code within the program.

If the [end user](glossary.md#end-user) does not set a `Tracer` to be used and does not
include the library which implements the `Tracer`, like the OpenTelemetry SDK,
the API must include a default minimal implementation which acts as a no-op
`Tracer`. The [library developers](glossary.md#library-developer) *must* be able to depend
on the API and instrument their code without thought to whether or not the final
deployable application includes the SDK or any other implementation.

To facilitate this, the [library developer](glossary.md#library-developer) can *not*
specify a `Tracer` implementation to use. The API *must* provide a way for the
developer to access a `Tracer`, which at runtime may be the default minimal
implementation from the API, the default full implementation known as the SDK or
a third party implementation.

However, even though the [library developer](glossary.md#library-developer) cannot define

> an implementation to use, they can, and should, give the `Tracer` a name and version:

Reviewer 4: +1 on @Oberon00's suggestion but I'd omit the parentheses

> - `name` (optional): This name must identify the instrumentation library (also

Reviewer 4: ```diff
- - `name` (required): This name must identify the instrumentation library (also	
+ - `name` (optional): This name must identify the instrumentation library (also
```

This is not a change making the spec language-agnostic but actually alters its meaning. If this was intended, please open a separate PR for it.

Reviewer 5: Requesting changes, because I also think this does not belong here (*and* I disagree with the change).

Author: Oh, that was meant to mean *if* you are giving a name/version you have to give a name, you can't just give a version.

Author: As in, if you just have them both as "optional" that means you could just pass a version. That isn't the intent, right?

I'll change it to "optional" and try making that clear another way.

Reviewer 3: This PR is only meant to be changing wording. In the original, name was required, thus it should continue to be required here.

Author: Oh, hah, I thought I changed it to required.

Still with the same intent, to make it clear that you do not have to provide a name, it *is* optional, just not if you are creating a named tracer.

Author: I've pushed to change it back to `required`. But I still think it is a bit confusing. Maybe it should be:

```markdown
- name: ...
- version (optional): ...
```

Author: Updated to be just `name:` how does that look?

Reviewer 3: no. name is required now. using the tracer factory/registry/whatever you call it is the only way to make a tracer and it requires you to pass a name.

Reviewer 3: From the otep:

>A TracerFactory / MeterFactory as the only means of creating a Tracer or Meter.

Author: Hm, I missed that discussion. Where was this decided?

Though maybe I'm just misunderstanding because of the usual confusion around what a Tracer is vs a "TracerFactory".

Reviewer 3: > Updated to be just `name:` how does that look?

lgtm

Author: Hehe, not more confused. Being just `name:` still means it is optional. The sentence above it says that a developer "should" give a name, not that they must.

Author: Ah, I see, https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/264/files#diff-ea4f4a46fe8755cf03f9fb3a6434cb0c

Author: I originally was going to removed any mention of named tracers from the API spec but since I knew it would be returning I didn't think it was worth it. Now I'm less sure.

Maybe I missed it going through a reapproval process after all the confusion? @tedsuo

  referred to as integration, e.g. `io.opentelemetry.contrib.mongodb`) and *not*
  the instrumented library.

> - `version` (optional and only allowed if a `name` is given): Specifies the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `version` (optional): Specifies the
```

redundant since a valid name is required

Author: This was to make clear that you can't only provide a version. But you can only provide a name.

  version of the instrumentation library (e.g. `semver:1.0.0`).

> So the API *must* offer functionality for the library developer to pass the

Reviewer 5: It may be worth clarifying that this functionality is not to be implemented in the API artifact itself but in the SDKs that implement the API. Although reading between the lines, "allow **implementations** to base the returned `Tracer` on that information" already says that.

## Tracer

> A `Tracer` is the code responsible for how `Spans`s are started and it exposes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A `Tracer` is the code responsible for starting `Span`s, and it exposes
```

the API which [library developers][] use when instrumenting their code. The API
MUST allow the [application developers][] to configure or specify the

> implementation at runtime, the default full implementation is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
implementation at runtime. The implementation is
```

referred to as the SDK in this spec, which is used by all instrumented code
within the program.

A `Tracer` is more than just the code though. Each `Tracer` has a name and a resource attached to it. The API must provide [library developers][] a way to access a `Tracer` with a specific name and attached resource. We'll call that component the `TracerProvider`, in an OOP language this would likely be a `Factory`.

> If the [application developers][] does not include a library which implements

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If [application developers][] do not specify a library which implements
```

the `TracerProvider`, like the OpenTelemetry SDK, the API must include a default
minimal implementation of a `TracerProvider` which returns a no-op `Tracer`. The
[library developers][] MUST be able to depend on the API and instrument their
code without thought to whether or not the final deployable application includes
the SDK or any other implementation.

> To facilitate this, the [library developers][] can NOT specify a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To facilitate this, the [library developers][] MUST NOT specify a
```

`TracerProvider` implementation to use. The API MUST provide a way for the
developer to access a `Tracer` from a `TracerProvider`, which at runtime may be
the default minimal implementation from the API, the default full implementation

> known as the SDK or a third party implementation.

Reviewer 3: oxford comma :)
```suggestion
known as the SDK, or a third party implementation.
```

However, even though the [library developers][] cannot define
an implementation to use, they can, and should, give the `Tracer` a name and version:

- `name`: This name must identify the instrumentation library (also
  referred to as integration, e.g. `io.opentelemetry.contrib.mongodb`) and NOT
  the instrumented library.
- `version` (optional): Specifies the
  version of the instrumentation library (e.g. `semver:1.0.0`).

> So the API MUST offer functionality for the library developer to pass the

Reviewer 3: Remove "So" from the start of this sentence

`name` and `version` to the implementation when retrieving the `Tracer`. The

> `name` and `version` are not attributes to be added to a retreived `Tracer`,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`name` and `version` are not attributes to be added to a retrieved `Tracer`,
```

> they must be able to be passed at the time of retrieval to allow

Reviewer 3: >...to a retreived `Tracer`, they must be...

This is a comma splice

Reviewer 3: Do not need "able to be".

```suggestion
they must be passed at the time of retrieval to allow
```

## Tracer

> A `Tracer` is the code responsible for how `Spans`s are started and ended, and

Reviewer 6: We have not made the "end" part of the Tracer. I did not see any implementation that does this.

Author: Right, ok, removed.

it exposes the API which [library developers](#library-developer) use when
instrumenting their code. The API MUST allow the [end user](#end-user) to
configure or specify at runtime the implementation, the default full
implementation is referred to as the SDK in this spec, which is used by all
instrumented code within the program.

If the [end user](#end-user) does not set a `Tracer` to be used and does not
include the library which implements the `Tracer`, like the OpenTelemetry SDK,
the API must include a default minimal implementation which acts as a no-op
`Tracer`. The [library developers](#library-developer) *must* be able to depend
on the API and instrument their code without thought to whether or not the final
deployable application includes the SDK or any other implementation.

> 

Reviewer 6: I think with the named Tracer concept, end-user does not provide an implementation for the Tracer, but for the "Tracer[Factory|Provider|Registry]". This is the class that becomes now the top level class of the API.

Author: Hm, right, I tried to avoid having to give that a name by only discussing the fact that the library developer must have a way of getting the `Tracer`, but in the case of the `end user` it does need to specify what they are configuring... I'm not sure what term is best for that. Factory is out and Registry gives the impression it must do more than is required. 

And Provider I thought was off the table because of the way Java already used it?

Reviewer 2: Other terms that come to mind are "Engine", "SDK", "Implementation". I think I prefer "Provider".

Reviewer 5: Other possible names, "TracerRoot", "RootTracer", "TracerSource".
Or we could even rename the Tracer to something like SpanCreator/SpanSource/SpanFactory and name what is now (not) the TracerFactory simply Tracer.

Reviewer 2: I like `TracerSource` and `TracerRoot`, but not `RootTracer`

`TracerRoot` is appealing because I like to think of a tree of tracers, where each derives from a parent by adding new resources--however we haven't written a spec for applying resources to tracers at this time, and there may be disagreement over the utility of this. (We have many examples of plugins creating spans with attributes that are static with respect to the plugin, and could be / ought to be treated as resources.)

The reason why I disagree with `RootTracer` is this: as I understand the primary goal of Named Tracers was to make an obligatory step where a user must provide a name, which implies that the "root" is not actually usable as a tracer.

Author: Ok, I've updated this using `TracerProvider`.

To facilitate this, the [library developer](#library-developer) can *not*
specify a `Tracer` implementation to use. The API *must* provide a way for the
developer to access a `Tracer`, which at runtime may be the default minimal
implementation from the API, the default full implementation known as the SDK or
a third party implementation.

However, even though the [library developer](#library-developer) cannot define
an implementation to use, they can, and should, give the `Tracer` a name and version:

- `name` (optional): This name must identify the instrumentation library (also
  referred to as integration, e.g. `io.opentelemetry.contrib.mongodb`) and *not*
  the instrumented library.
- `version` (optional and only allowed if a `name` is given): Specifies the
  version of the instrumentation library (e.g. `semver:1.0.0`).

Because the `Tracer` can have a separate `name` and `version`, but shares

> everything else with all other `Tracer` references used by the other libraries

Reviewer 6: It is not a required from the API that they share "everything else". Some implementation may want to have a state within the Tracer itself on top of the shared state.

Author: Ok. But the API does not expose any way setting at the time of `GetTracer` anything beyond `name` and `version`, right? That is what I meant to convey but ended up specifying what happens on the SDK side instead. Working on rewording this.

Author: I rewrote this paragraph.

within an application, the implementations can include a cache of the `Tracer`s
that have been created.

Since whether there is a cache that acts as a registry of name's to `Tracer`s is
outside the scope of the API, the API *must* provide only one function for the
[library developer](#library-developer) to access a `Tracer`. Meaning, there
can not be `GetTracer` and `NewTracer` functions becuase the API is oblivious to

> the underlying implementation.

Reviewer 6: Not sure I understand what this sentence is trying to suggest. Can you please clarify?

Author: I added this because I saw discussion about whether it should be `Get` or `New` and want the API to be clear and have only one, not include a get and new function if the underlying  implementation might be using a registry -- "new" creating a new entry in the registry and "get" finding an entry in the registry.

I can remove it and just say that there should be a `GetTracer`.

Author: Updated, removed that sentence.

A `Tracer` is more than just the code though. Each `Tracer` has a name and a
resource attached to it. The API must provide [library developers][] a way to
access a `Tracer` with a specific name and attached resource. We'll call that
component the `TracerProvider`, in an OOP language this would likely be a
`Factory`.

If [application developers][] do not specify a library which implements
the `TracerProvider`, like the OpenTelemetry SDK, the API must include a default
minimal implementation of a `TracerProvider` which returns a no-op `Tracer`. The
[library developers][] MUST be able to depend on the API and instrument their
code without thought to whether or not the final deployable application includes
the SDK or any other implementation.

To facilitate this, the [library developers][] MUST NOT specify a
`TracerProvider` implementation to use. The API MUST provide a way for the
developer to access a `Tracer` from a `TracerProvider`, which at runtime may be
the default minimal implementation from the API, the default full implementation
known as the SDK, or a third party implementation.

However, even though the [library developers][] cannot define

> an implementation to use, they can, and should, give the `Tracer` a name and version:

Reviewer 4: from https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/354#discussion_r347363096
```suggestion
an implementation to use, they MUST provide their instrumentation library's name and version when accesing a `Tracer`:```

> an implementation to use, they can, and should, give the `Tracer` a name and version:

Reviewer 4: from https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/354#discussion_r347363096
```suggestion
an implementation to use, they MUST provide their instrumentation library's name and version when accessing a `Tracer`:```

## Tracer

A `Tracer` is the code responsible for how `Spans`s are started and it exposes
the API which [library developers][] use when instrumenting their code. The API
MUST allow the [application developers][] to configure or specify the
implementation at runtime, the default full implementation is
referred to as the SDK in this spec, which is used by all instrumented code
within the program.

A `Tracer` is more than just the code though. Each `Tracer` has a name and a
resource attached to it. The API must provide [library developers][] a way to
access a `Tracer` with a specific name and attached resource. We'll call that
component the `TracerProvider`, in an OOP language this would likely be a

> `Factory`.

Reviewer 7: is this reference to "OOP language" meant to imply that some APIs may call this Provider while others Factory? Or is is simply trying to clarify? If the former, then I think it's a bad idea, unnecessary divergence. If the latter, then I would rephrase `(aka a "Factory pattern" in OOP)` (and link to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Factory_method_pattern)

Reviewer 3: I agree that consistent naming is a good idea. In JS we called it `Registry` because it seemed that people were against calling it `Factory` but I'm happy to change that to `Provider`.

Author: Yea, it was just to try giving some clarity to what the provider is, since many will be familiar with factory pattern even if not working with it directly.

I'll update to make that clear.

Author: Feels better just being removed. So for now there is no mention of the factory pattern.

> If the [application developers][] does not include a library which implements

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
If the [application developers][] do not include a library which implements
```

the `TracerProvider`, like the OpenTelemetry SDK, the API must include a default
minimal implementation of a `TracerProvider` which returns a no-op `Tracer`. The
[library developers][] MUST be able to depend on the API and instrument their
code without thought to whether or not the final deployable application includes
the SDK or any other implementation.

To facilitate this, the [library developers][] can NOT specify a
`TracerProvider` implementation to use. The API MUST provide a way for the
developer to access a `Tracer` from a `TracerProvider`, which at runtime may be
the default minimal implementation from the API, the default full implementation
known as the SDK or a third party implementation.

> However, even though the [library developers][] cannot define

Reviewer 7: This part is redundant, repeats what was said in the previous paragraph. I would add a sub-section header here, like "Tracer Name" or Named Tracers.

Author: Done.

an implementation to use, they can, and should, give the `Tracer` a name and version:

- `name`: This name must identify the instrumentation library (also
  referred to as integration, e.g. `io.opentelemetry.contrib.mongodb`) and NOT
  the instrumented library.
- `version` (optional): Specifies the
  version of the instrumentation library (e.g. `semver:1.0.0`).

> So the API MUST offer functionality for the library developer to pass the

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The API MUST offer functionality for the library developer to pass the
```

> `name` and `version` to the implementation when retrieving the `Tracer`. The

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
`name` and `version` to `TracerProvider` when retrieving the `Tracer`. The
```

> `name` and `version` are not attributes to be added to a retreived `Tracer`,

Reviewer 7: From this point I don't follow what this is trying to say.

Author: Yea, I'm not sure either now... Will push something to hopefully clear up this paragraph in a second.

they must be able to be passed at the time of retrieval to allow
implementations, in the SDKs, to base the returned `Tracer` on that information.

### Tracer operations

There MUST be functions associated with a `Tracer` to:

- Get the currently active `Span`
- Create a new `Span`
- Make a given `Span` as active

> The `Tracer` SHOULD allow application developer to configure other tracing

Reviewer 7: I disagree with this paragraph.

  1. Global behavioral settings for tracers should be configurable on the TraceProvider. In fact, application developers never even deal with Tracer.
  1. When library developers use Propagators to encode/decode context, they are not dealing with Tracers at all.

Author: Right, fixing this up now.

Author: Just removing that whole paragraph, it doesn't belong.

- Create a new `Span`
- Make a given `Span` as active

> The `Tracer` SHOULD allow application developer to configure other tracing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `Tracer` SHOULD allow the application developer to configure other tracing
```

* `CONSUMER` Indicates that the span describes a consumer receiving a message from
  a broker. As for the `PRODUCER` kind, there is often no direct critical
  path latency relationship between producer and consumer spans.

> ## User Definitions

Reviewer 6: Please start a new document with these definitions where we can refer to them form other docs as well. Also see some good picture here:
https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/blob/master/text/0006-sampling.md

- <a name="library-developer"></a>Library Developer: This is a developer working

>   on code that will be confused by others. They are not creating a final

Reviewer 6: If I am the library-dev, I think you are correct :)) all my code is confusing :)))

Author: hahah, woops, that should be "consumed" :)

Reviewer 8: bon appetit :), maybe simply `used`
